the dawn of everything is is trying to undo just to write about even very remote periods of history
that we have evidence for as if there were real people in them which sounds like a ridiculous
thing to say but it's very rarely done you know prehistoric people are more likely to be compared
to non-human primates than they are to people like you or I.
What if everything we knew about human history was wrong?
Received wisdom is that humans have been around for two maybe 300,000 years
but that we only start agriculture in the last 10 to 12,000 after that we have cities,
astronomy, numbers, civilization as we know it but according to a book by David Wengrow and the
recently deceased David Graber that's not quite accurate they say that cities and what we judge as
advanced human culture actually precedes agriculture the story of prehistory is far more
complex and interesting than we thought and that this has quite remarkable political implications.
David Wengrow, welcome to Downstream. Thanks for having me on.
You're an archaeologist you teach archaeology at University College London
is that a job you always wanted to do when you were a child?
No it isn't when I left school I wanted to be in the theatre and I'd already done a fair bit
of that I think from the age of about 14 I fell in love with acting in the stage and I joined up
with the National Youth Theatre which was a wonderful time because it was the first time
Londoner was the first time I actually met people from all over the country all over the UK
and I did it I left school and got an agent and did that for a while then did various other things
and then I fell into archaeology more or less by accident.
So how was that? Wow child actor becomes archaeo that sounds like a great story.
Yeah I think it was more of a sort of young adult actor I mean I've met child actors and
they're a very specific kind of person but there's never quite one of those but
what happened basically after trying various other things including a little
flotation with journalism at the BBC Arabic service and various other things I wasn't
really finding a direction so I had good grades from school and I decided to apply to Oxford
well that's when I want to go to the best university I can get into I want to go to Oxford
and I wrote to all these Oxford colleges saying can I come and do English literature
and they all ignored me and a friend of mine who it was told me it's easier to get into places
like that if you apply for a subject that's a bit off the beaten track and they had just
started a new programme new degree called Archaeology and Anthropology which is actually
the name of the degree that I teach and coordinate now at UCL. So I wrote to one college in Hughes
College asking if I could do that and I got an interview and I went into this interview with
a very formidable woman called Barbara Kennedy she was a geographer because they didn't have any
archaeologists at that particular college and she grilled me for a while and I sort of spouted on
about how archaeology was my great passion and so on and then she reached down and produced from
under her chair all these letters that I'd written to other colleges saying can I come and do English
literature I thought well I'll bolt that up but then she admitted me and I was technically a mature
student although it was probably anything but in terms of everything else but I think it was
classified as a mature student when I started and I nearly made a complete mess of that actually
and nearly got slung out after about six months but I had one teacher it was one of those things
where it's just one person actually gets you hooked and gives you the confidence to think you
know yes you know you have a place in this you can contribute and that was a guy called Andrew
Sherrod who passed away very young actually same age as David 59 and just had a massive
heart attack one day but really sort of got me to pull my finger out and got me addicted to this
stuff and I didn't really look back after that because there's something here all the time I'm
sure that at some point most people when they're children want to be archaeologists yeah I did
I mean there's obviously something there I can remember a school trip to Old Serum
St Salisbury Plain one of these great Iron Age hill forts and I came back from that and went back
I used to live with my grandparents a lot in North London I remember going back to their
place after that and my head was just full of images you know I could see all the different
sort of waves of migrations and invasions and I produced this this sort of tone this is all
pre-computers I think I got like a calligraphy pen or something and sort of tried to create a
I remember my grand helping me with coffee grinds to sort of age the paper so you know
there was something there which is completely irrational where you just feel an attachment
to some era and I don't have any family roots in the British Isles so you know it's not like a
local attachment but you just identify for some reason with a place or an era of history
and I don't know why that happens but clearly people who choose
to pursue archaeology they have they have that in an unusually high dosage
just against the meat of your book the dawn of everything
the conventional view is humans have been around for 200 300 000 years you can give the specific
numbers in the answer but we've only engaged in agriculture for 12 000 years 11 000 years
12 000 years and that with the advent of agriculture we then get all the things that we associate
with with modern humans cities numbers numeracy literacy astronomy civilization your book
co-written with the recently departed David Graber says that's completely wrong or it's
it's significantly wrong um well we'd have to pick apart what you said there uh a bit
Aaron you know um when you say we we started having agriculture 12 000 years ago
only a very tiny number of people on the planet started doing that in very specific locations
specifically the Middle East or they sometimes call the fertile crescent most of the world at that
time was still hunter-gatherers and fishes so um you know actually what you've presented as a
summary is a classic example of what we would call a kind of stage theory where you've got these
long periods when sort of nothing happens then everything changes you get the agricultural
revolution populations expand then you get cities and everything changes again then you get civilization
and one of the things we try to show in the book is that actually the process is much more
interesting than that and you've got people at what are supposed to be different phases or stages
of history actually living cheek by jowl sort of feeding off each other reacting against each other
and also consciously planning and designing societies according to different sets of values
which you know when we talk about civilization and modernity there's this deeply ingrained assumption
to think that it's only us moderns or supposedly moderns you know us post enlightenment folk
who've been able to do that to actually make a decision about the kinds of societies we wish to
live in and then consciously try to make that happen um and I think that's that's a deeply
rooted idea both in the intellectual philosophical and political traditions of the left and of the
right in Europe in the european tradition let's say and we think that's wrong and as you say humans
have been around as far as we know humans who are cognitively just like you and I
same kinds of brains perfectly capable of having a conversation just like the one that we're having
for something in the order of 200 to 300 thousand years and what we know about most of that
time is vanishingly little um but if you think about it that's extraordinary I mean the number
of things that could have happened the number of different kinds of conversations and experiments
that could have taken place and yet the way we tend to write about and characterize those
early periods is the opposite it's as if people were existing in some sort of strange haze just
kind of you know following patterns or routines until one day somebody invents agriculture and
everything changes and that's the kind of I guess conceptual damage that we do to our own past
the the dawn of everything is is trying to undo just to write about even very remote periods of
history that we have evidence for as if there were real people in them which sounds like a
ridiculous thing to say but it's very rarely done you know prehistoric people are more likely to be
compared to non-human primates than they are to people like you or I and I love this insert which
you have which I'd never ever thought of before maybe we can go into a little bit about foragers
hunter-gatherers being less parochial basically than modern humans I mean maybe not today in the
age of the internet but until relatively recently yeah can you talk about Alice this is this is
one of the great revelations of modern archaeology is you know this whole idea that humans before
agriculture lived in these tiny bands sort of isolated isolated pockets of humanity nomadic
roaming around the landscape not having much contact is completely wrong like we can trace back
now in concrete terms evidence going back tens and tens of thousands of years before agriculture
to show that human societies you know way even beyond the last ice age were already highly
structured over very large areas interacting moving things around the landscape we've got
scientific techniques these days which are pretty good I mean you can actually trace
people's diets tens of thousands of years ago you can say whether they moved from a
coastal environment to a terrestrial environment you can trace movements of plants animals raw
materials we have ancient DNA so there are many methods by which we can reconstruct a picture of
early human societies and it turns out that the world was highly connected and if you think about
it this shouldn't be surprising because of course one of the first things that that humans do
is actually move and actually the word that's usually used is that we colonize the globe
which is a strange term to think of in a way because there's nobody out there
to be colonized but we move and we we we somehow find our way everywhere from Africa down to
South America and eventually Australia so you actually start off with a highly
integrated and connected social universe which may not demographically involve that many people
but they're finding ways to maintain connections and transfer ideas over extraordinary distances
in a way that in say the middle ages in Europe certainly wasn't the case the average
yeah rural peasant wouldn't leave there that's right and this is very interesting because it
means you have to rethink scale like the whole scalar factor in human history in a way I think
the sort of stereotypical picture that most people have is kind of back to from where you
know you think you start off with these small isolated groups and then human populations expand
and we end up with globalization it's almost the opposite actually if you look at the history of
the Middle East for example you go from having these big kind of regional systems to a situation
where today you know if you want to move from Cairo to Damascus you've either got to work for the
CIA or go through you know about 50 different border checks so in a way actually you know the
history of nation states and hard borders we've become much more enclosed over time one thing
about megalithic sites which again I've only really discovered in the last several years your book
is a part of that is the role of astronomy and obviously there's the equinoxes and the solstices
but more besides that too often certain constellations of constellations of stars being sort of aligned
and recognised and whatnot so are we looking then at many many societies which didn't have agriculture
yet engaged in really advanced astronomy because again that's something people don't really
and navigation you know we're talking about human populations finding their way through
island landscapes to remote places out in the middle of the pacific of course you know they've
got to have a superb grasp practically and intellectually of topography and the behaviour of
of the seas and yes I mean there's no question and you see it reflected in monumental architecture
from very early periods which is often laid out in very precise alignments in relation to other
monuments in relation to the solstices here in the UK obviously you have famously Stonehenge
that's right I mean people were were clearly more than capable of developing very sophisticated
mathematical geometrical understandings in different ways to the way we do it now
and the most famous I guess sort of discussion of this was the book in the 1960s by Claude
Livestrasse where he tried to suggest that there are basically two different forms of science
there's our notion of science which begins in the laboratory so you carve out an artificial
environment and you have many codes or whatever you know trying to generate new ideas and theories
which are then applied to the world and he contrasted that with the way that most human
discovery throughout the history of our species has actually taken place which is a world of
discovery in which there are no laboratories discovery is part and parcel of social life it's
out there in the landscape in people's interactions with plants and animals it's applied from the
beginning and that presumably is how all those early systems of navigation monumental construction
metallurgy all of these things were discovered and generated through other systems of knowledge
than the one that we're familiar with which is kind of intriguing in itself
was Stonehenge built by people that engage in agriculture do we know that for a fact for instance
that was the consensus until very recently but actually what we found out in
in just the last sort of a couple of decades is that the picture is more interesting so Stonehenge
by the time it's constructed about 5 000 years ago farming has already been adopted in the British
Isles as an import from the European continent but then as in many other places of the world and
again you know this goes back to your initial characterization of human history where you
get agriculture and then everything changes the British Isles are one of many examples of where
people adopt agriculture and then basically change their minds so the period when Stonehenge and
many other great monuments constructed is actually one in which the populations of this island
more or less give up the habit of cereal farming and they go back to foraging wild nuts and acorns
and things as their staple plant food they decide to keep they hold on to other things so they hold
on to the farming of animals pigs and cattle in particular there's a site close to Stonehenge
called Durrington walls where they've actually found the place where people congregated for seasonal
festivals and feasted on huge amounts of meat it must have been a hell of a party and this presumably
was at the times when they were also engaging in these big coordinated construction activities
that we see there so it's a more complex picture they're not farmers or hunter-gatherers they're
some hybrid of like farmer forager herders or something so you're saying essentially it's a
social choice that's being made it must have been i mean i can't imagine any other way in which people
from you know one end of the country to the other turn their backs on a practice like cereal i mean
how could that happen unconsciously there's no evidence of any sort of massive climatic
rupture or depopulation it just seems to be people deciding that that's not actually what
they want to do anymore that's quite that's quite an extraordinary political choice isn't i mean
it is you know sort of analog to stonehenge is quite extraordinary i mean there must have
been pretty extraordinary things going on for people to even engage in those kind of you know
feats of construction but for a contemporary audience i mean the equivalent would be us
deciding that the industrial revolution wasn't a good idea or just you know to stop using fossil
fuels wouldn't it i mean yeah in terms of social implications obviously they weren't thinking in
those terms but it's actually yeah and and it raises a question right which is if people have
been able to make decisions on that scale in what we are taught to think of as primitive societies
why do we struggle so much with those kinds of structural changes now
which leads me on to i suppose the central question in the book for our audience which is a
political audience there are obviously extraordinary political implications if
the generic what you call stagest view of history is incorrect or inaccurate
because this is the bedrock of most modern political theory from in different ways lock
russo hobs we can talk about that in a second but also more contemporary people you know
the steven pinkers the u val horaries because their essential formulation is
the more complex society becomes the more unequal the more unjust but it creates it
creates more abundance therefore there's a kind of utilitarian argument for it you know it's
well you're talking you're talking about authors and books who sometimes explicitly model what
they're doing on those philosophers of two or three hundred years ago you know people actually
say i am a neo-hobsian nor a kind of neo-russoian take on human history which is interesting and
it's something david and i noticed around the time when we decided to start thinking about
these kinds of issues was pretty much exactly the time of the last big financial crash about
two thousand and eight nine and you know there was a slew of literature as you might expect on
inequality and the roots of inequality and suddenly a lot of those very old ideas you
know going all the way back to the 17th 18th centuries really coming back in quite a surprisingly
aggressive way you know let's think again about the deep roots of inequality let's go back to
harps let's go back to russo which as you say you know we're talking about the the foundational
texts of modern political theory but it's important to remember that they were completely
speculative i mean they were conjured out of the imaginations of those people with no evidence
tangibly whatsoever for the nature of human societies hundreds thousands of years ago
so it's these are kind of imaginary worlds of prehistory which is quite a sobering thought
you know the idea that modern political thought actually comes out of imagination
and its imagination rooted in very specific political contexts you know leviathan was written
what 1651 middle of the english civil war and it's partly about what is the nature of society
without government and why is government necessary russo died what 10 years before the french
revolution you know when he's addressing the question what are the origins of inequality it is
the burning question of his time so these are entirely political you know they're exercises
in political imagination which are obviously radical and generative at their time but why
should we be still asking questions that were pertinent in 1754 in 2022 is i think an interesting
question in itself when we've got all this other information all this other evidence you know why
are we still asking the same questions in this slightly sort of sclerotic manner you are an
academic you're at ucl i was at ucl as an undergraduate oh yeah i did some modules in
political theories it goes and what are you taught you know introduction to political theory
hobs lock playto robert not sick it's more contemporary political theorists
generals but who these effectively are building their thinking on the early liberal tradition
of lock on hobs and it's basically 101 why you should obey the state and like you say it's it's
it's based on conjecture speculation which is several hundred years old and this is a modern
institution in a very advanced western capitalist market economy where apparently we believe so
deeply and passionately in empiricism and yet the very basis upon which we say political sort of
political status quo is legitimate is nonsense frankly it's a good example of i think what is
wrong with universities quite often because you know around the corner from where you were doing
that would have been the place where i worked so we're talking about what the 19 i can't place you
here and you're very ageless no no 2003 okay so around the corner from where you were learning
about lock and rules and all the rest of it would have been the place where i work the
institute of archaeology actually i think i probably was already just about teaching there
around that time no sorry 2003 no god no thank god no i wasn't
and yeah um you know just up the road from there you would have had all these people
actually studying uh human prehistory but you know it's i guess it's unfortunately in the
nature of universities to carve these things up into separate departments which don't actually
generate that kind of learning where knowledge moves in what should be very obvious directions
so well how does this stuff look now in light of what we actually know and what are the implications
of that so i think it's highly unlikely that archaeology students would have been thinking about
those philosophers whereas the students learning about those philosophers almost certainly wouldn't
have been thinking about the evidence of deep human history and i think that is a that is a
that is a problem i mean it's a lost learning opportunity effectively but isn't it a failure
also the academics yeah totally absolutely 100 percent i mean it just strikes me as completely
crazy that you know you have talented professionals treating teaching this frankly nonsense to young
people but a really important subject you could teach you don't have to teach it as nonsense i mean
you could see it as part of a tradition you know it is it is it is it is important to to study it
but you know within the confines of what it is and actually you know when you look closely at these
texts they're very openly speculative you know rousseau i think sort of spells it out somewhere
when he's describing a story very similar to the one you started with about you know how agriculture
trapped us in certain new ways of life and he mentioned a private property he says do not take
this as history this is effectively a thought experiment and you know it's it's meant to make
you reflect on what private property is and its place in the world and its effect on us as human
beings the distinction of mine and vine if you like it's not meant to be a reconstruction so actually
what's happened with some of the other modern authors you mentioned is also rather strange
where you've got what began as sort of radical speculation is now presented as objective truth
or even a sort of laws of history and that's what i think sort of provoked us you know david as an
anthropologist me as an archaeologist to think hold on this isn't okay you know we should try
and do something about this basically and that you know that kind of motivated us to um to start
trying to liberate um some of this extraordinary body of knowledge from from these rather siloed
context you know get it out from behind the paywall journals and start piecing together a puzzle which
is still very incomplete of human history but there's already enough pieces there to say that
it looks nothing like the stories that we've inherited from the Enlightenment. Let's talk
about um indigenous american society um again there's a few more questions particularly around this
which i i think are so impressive just the the source material that you cover in the book and
things that i've just also learned in recent years again let's go back to um stereotypes
and received wisdom the idea is that europeans discover the western hemisphere in 1492 will
leave um leaf ericsson to one side and just came back from sweden actually more keen they
they haven't forgotten they have no they haven't that's it's interesting it's interesting how they
do really emphasize that isn't it the nordics um we discover effectively a backward civilization
which we then broadly exterminate through a combination of guns germs and and steel um
that's not quite right though is it no and i mean i've been very fortunate in the last
year to be able once travel became possible again after the pandemic to spend some time
in canada and in the u.s including talking with indigenous scholars and historians on various
campuses um about this um and it's not there is a lot in the book i wrote with david about the
pre-columbian americas um and about early colonial contacts between european colonizers
and uh native peoples and um it's not an area that is actually you know particularly within
either of our wheel houses you know david's field work as an anthropologist was in madagascar
my uh phd and most of my field experiences in north africa in the middle east so this was a
steep learning curve for us which i'm still very much on uh but it was necessary in order to answer
the questions we were asking particularly about the origins of inequality which is how the the
project started uh if you look at the literature around the middle of the 18th century take a
figure like rousseau and the intellectual milieu in which they're debating the ideas they're thinking
through you cannot avoid the americas and particularly that part of north america that's
now split between canada and upstate new york basically the the great lakes region and what
sometimes called the eastern woodlands which is where europeans uh encountered societies that were
organized on radically different lines uh much more democratic lines uh with uh levels of freedom
particularly for women which were unheard of in european societies at the time and which clearly
had an enormous impact on the european imagination including on the political imagination and we
found it was impossible really to understand what was going on you know when we were once we decided
that we didn't want to uh fall into that trap of just recapitulating these questions and stories
from hundreds of years ago we started asking well how did they come about in the first place and
that does lead you down a certain line of questioning which leads to the americas and
that's why the book ended up with such a strong focus there let's talk about candieronk a candieronk
and maybe you've got a really good french accent i've no section some videos i'll watch for this
um he is an actually existing figure it seems i definitely i mean you can if you want to google
it you can see an image from 1701 of a treaty called the great piece of montreal and you can
see candieronk's signature his mark on it so what's candieronk's importance who is he candieronk was
very well known figure person of the here on wendat nation which is is very much still
a thing it has its administrative center which i was lucky enough to be invited to
on the outskirts of quebec city where they have a small street called candieronk
arm celebre um so we were joking that maybe should extend it a bit now because he's he's um
he is um a key sort of um individual in in our book um because we have various independent
accounts of this person which tell us that uh in that time so we're talking about the the end of
the 17th century this is someone who's playing a pivotal role um in diplomacy warfare and in
trying to negotiate a better future for for his own people in the midst of a highly complex
colonial situation with french english dutch colonizers and so on in the mix someone who was
multilingual and who in addition to all of those qualities was clearly an extraordinary intellect
and a brilliant speaker um and we have various independent accounts of this um but for reasons
which are very contingent um some of those kinds of conversations and ideas that would have been
exchanged between candieronk and european interlocutors at the time found their way
to a much larger audience in europe we know that around that time the governor of what europeans
then referred to as part of new france that part of the colonies would actually invite candieronk
to his table to engage in debates purely for pleasure he says you know i did it to entertain
my offices because this guy was just so funny and witty and they would debate many of the topics
that would later become central to what we think of as enlightenment thought you know
rationality versus revealed religion sexual habits marriage customs questions of freedom
the role of money in society and in the mix of people who witnessed those conversations
was a a minor french nobleman who went by the name la honte the baron la honte
who is a person who went over to the colonies in his youth i think at the age of 17
lived there for a decade spoke at least two uh indigenous languages um and was deeply embroiled
in the goings on uh of of those tumultuous times it also seems to have been a bit of a
troublemaker didn't get on with authority ended up getting kicked out of the colonies and found
himself uh more or less penniless on the streets of amsterdam and he writes these books these sort
of travel logs and finds his way back into favor at court um and one of those books is the one
called curious dialogues with a savage of good sense who has traveled and it features these
conversations between la honte playing himself and a character called adario who everyone
accepts is based on kandirong and in these dialogues adario slash kandirong gives the most brilliant
sort of scathing withering analysis of european civilization and this is the book that takes
off like wildfire and inspires countless imitations it's it's a bestseller it's translated into
multiple european languages uh stage plays which run for years are based on it and uh it becomes
the foundation of a whole genre of such dialogues that almost every major enlightenment thinker
had to go at so they will take the substance of the dialogues and put them in the mouth of some
completely imaginary exotic you know other person maybe a tahitian or chinese or you know
there are many different examples but the the context that it comes out of is is a real one
of culture contact and exchange and the effects on european thought we would argue were explosive
so kandirong in other words ought to be considered part of the story of what we call the enlightenment
in the same way as voltaire dida and all the rest i mean importantly it proceeds all of them so
and it proceeds them all by some decades so you have what you might call a sort of proto
enlightenment salon before the appearance of the the famous salons in europe you call this the
indigenous critique um which again reading it i was like it seems obvious in in in retrospect so
for instance you know you have engagement between the americas and europe between 1500 and let's say
you know the early 18th century 200 years there of of of cultural to and throw and clearly there
would have been these kinds of dialogues and there would have been some transmission back to
europe it may not have been as much as one would have hoped or have liked but it would have been
significant we're talking about 200 years and yet that barely figures in our in our understanding of
the exploitation and the colonization of the americas it's seen as purely one way in terms of ideas
in terms of capital and humans um but what you say which i think is actually very empowering for
for for peoples and ideas which aren't in the global north the most powerful countries is actually
it went both ways and that you can actually situate an indigenous american or you know a whole
sort of school of thought which is you know coming out of the americas within that european
enlightenment which is just i think really powerful well isn't it isn't it actually earth
shattered isn't it isn't it odd that we even have to make that point i mean you know what
what's the other implication that these people were you know either living in in some utterly
different uh sort of mode of reality um which cannot be entirely true given that we're talking
about a period of trade and military alliances and you know very intense interaction um it's not
controversial to point to the fact that europeans adopted a lot of material habits from the americas
at that time many of which are actually linked to the habits of sitting around having those kind
of intellectual conversations you know smoking tobacco from pipes drinking caffeinated beverages
and yet there is a great resistance to the idea that along with those substances and material
habits came ideas you know then you get real kickback and that's kind of interesting in itself
because all we're trying to argue in a way is that ideas particularly about democracy and freedom
which european enlightenment philosophers themselves attributed to the americas were actually
theirs and i think there is something disempowering about the idea that notions of freedom
um do not come from the oppressed or do not come from the colonized but there's something to do
with ancient greece or you know somehow sort of rooted in europe actually in the soil of the
colonizer i think that is disempowering um and there is something uh uh for those who haven't
already realized this there is something emancipatory in understanding what perhaps should be obvious
that actually ideas about um how to free oneself from oppression come from the oppressed
let's talk about some particular places in the americas there's one place called cahokia
yeah it was there not long ago about eight months ago so around a thousand years ago this place is
the same size as as london so about a thousand ad it's got population in the tens of thousands
you know ballpark it's a it gets up uh estimates are uh something like around perhaps 40 000 people
at its height um around the 14th century yeah so maybe norwich or something you know it's a
largest european city what happens to it um this is very interesting and a little bit controversial
but what is clear is that having grown and extended i say i was walking around in this place with
colleagues of mine including an archaeologist who's worked there all his life like about 30 years
which was great because when you go there um there isn't a lot to explain to you what you're
walking around there's this enormous mound called the monks mound there are many different
earthworks and mounds there and this thing is huge um and it's in the middle of what is now
a kind of national park that has a road running through the middle of it and you know this
unfortunately has been the fate of many important uh indigenous heritage sites um in north america
you may have a road running through it um you get very good mexican food and those little
restaurants and things and you're actually standing in the middle of the largest uh pre-columbian
city the largest uh indigenous settlement um in north america and it has these great monuments
archaeologists have worked there over the years um it becomes uh uh the center of a whole regional
system not probably an empire uh in the sense that we think about it but the influence culturally
and politically of cahokia spreads on a really extraordinary scale throughout the mississippi
base and um it's clear that certain things are going on there um which are predicated on
various forms of hierarchy or inequality there's a mound which is is actually full of the bodies of
young women who seem to have been ritually killed in in some kind of horrible ceremony
um on the monks mound itself there there's an incredible uh ability to have surveillance over
the whole settlement and we know that when the site centralizes the surrounding countryside sort of
empties out you get these housing districts which would have all been visible from up there
you get fortifications forming and it seems to be going in that kind of direction and then
everything changes uh and the area is abandoned depopulated archaeologists for generations have
referred to the whole region around cahokia as a sort of vacant quarter um and it appears to have been
almost forgotten i guess to the extent that um we don't even know you know the name of this place
the genuine name of this place it doesn't really feature in any clear way in later oral histories
so people in some way or other turn their back on cahokia and there are various theories about
this to do with environmental collapse um which are in my opinion not entirely compelling um
and uh increasingly i think people are looking at this situation in the same way that they're
beginning to look at the uh the so-called uh Puebla civilizations of the american southwest
where again you have these um you know quite big centralized sites which are subsequently
abandoned is that well why shouldn't we at least consider the possibility that people are genuinely
walking away and deciding to create a different uh a different kind of social order different
kind of social arrangements and actually when you start looking at it that way it enables you to
join the dots or make a bit more sense of the kinds of societies that europeans did eventually
encounter few centuries later in the same regions some of which were still very hierarchical like
little mini cahokias but others had developed uh this highly egalitarian uh way of living
which you know the natural assumption for europeans to make is that they just always been that way
but of course we're talking about people with fully developed historical consciousness
who do have in their own histories the history of cahokia and the whole regional system that
it generated which goes almost as far north as the great lakes so there is a hierarchical past
there that people have for one reason or another turned their backs on and created a different
form of society um and uh that's something that we um we dwell on a bit in the book because it just
you know it enables you to get past this idea um that we're talking about people who are somehow
you know frozen in one pattern of culture uh or sort of have no history there's also this other
great example of i'll get this right tia ti huakan which is i think that's very good but i'm told by
my mexican colleague that um even mexican scholars don't always pronounce it quite there's
teotihuacan which she tells me is better but you hear teotihuacan anyway i think we're okay i think
we're fine yeah it's possible um so this is a city that in terms of its size scale magnificence at
rivals rome um very centralized very authoritarian then then something changes and you sort of imply
it's almost like a you know this is the paris commune in the sort of western hemisphere but
potentially there's a big sort of political shift well the archaeologist who guy called rene milan
who produced this extraordinary map of teotihuacan which we um were very fortunate to get permission
to reproduce the map so you can see it in the dawn of everything and he um directed one of the most
incredible ground surveys ever undertaken in the history of archaeology because we're talking about
absolutely vast settlement which at its height uh around 300 ad would have had
well conservative estimates say a hundred thousand people i've seen estimates that go up to double
that big place and uh milan himself and some later scholars argued that there was a a turn
around like a complete reversal of of fortunes for that population where it begins uh on a very
hierarchical path you know if you go there today as a tourist or just google some pictures of the site
you'll see the two great pyramids pyramid of the sun pyramid of the moon this other great
structure called the temple of the feathered serpent um these are all later names that the
aztec actually invented for teotihuacan we don't know what they were originally called so it begins
in this very hierarchical way and again you've even got evidence for ritual killing and human
sacrifice they buried the bodies of captives under the foundations of the pyramids it's quite
disturbing the hands type behind their backs and they built these structures on top of them
but then something changes uh around 300 ad 250 300 ad there is no more monumental construction on
bat scale and all of the labor and resources that presumably went into building great temples
and pyramids go into something else and that's something else is housing and they cover the
entire settlement on a grid uh formation with beautiful housing apartments these are uh uh
apartments which are low rise so we're going to go about apartment compounds we're not talking
high rise we're talking something more like a villa with a number of a small number of
nuclear families big central courtyard subfloor drainage gorgeous murals on the walls actually
when archaeologists first started investigating those housing complexes they thought there were
palaces then they realized that everybody in the city was living in a palace um now how we to
conceptualize this we don't have any detailed written sources from the time archaeologists
have tried in various ingenious ways to sort of reconstruct what was going on but what you can say
is that people in that city from that point onwards had a really good standard of living
and that it was generalized to you know the whole urban population which is pretty extraordinary
and we know uh you know you talk about guns germs and steel if we skip ahead
some centuries to the the beginning of the the spanish conquest when we do have
eyewitness chronicles and accounts of the kind of cities that existed in that region
uh from say um the 16th century onwards um there are a whole different range of them you know we
tend to think about tenosh titlan and montezuma and sort of aztec empire and that it's all very
hierarchical actually and we we go into this in the book the city where hernan courtes and the
conquistadors make alliances that enable them to go and challenge the the might of the aztec empire
is a city uh by the name of claskala which had a relationship to the aztec capital that was a
bit like athens and sparta there's one's very hierarchical the other one's very democratic
claskala clearly was a republic of some sort with its own parliament and we even have records
in spanish um of the kind of debates uh that went on there and this just doesn't
feature in our world histories you know we're quite rightly taught that the fall of tenosh titlan
was uh in in a sense you know the beginning of um western global domination what we're not taught
is that one of the things you know one of the steps on that pathway was this extraordinary
encounter between uh european conquerors and an indigenous urban democracy of sorts and i've
got no hesitation in calling it a democracy um at a time when uh you know cities run on that kind of
basis were extremely unusual in europe itself and you know none of this is terribly sort of secret
you don't have to delve very deep into the sources we've got the letters that courtes himself wrote
back to the king of spain saying i found this place it's it's weird you know there's no king
it's it's maybe a little bit like some of our florentine or venice you know it's run on some
other principles all this stuff is out there um but um it really isn't given the prominence that
you know you think it it probably ought to have i mean that sounds what you're describing in um
and you know these are obviously people who have no connection whatsoever to the mediterranean
you know ancient greece road yeah nothing to do with it there's an indigenous form of urban
government what you're describing in teotihuacan um sounds like a revolution potentially or a
social revolution yeah there are yeah absolutely and and there are um experts uh on on that site uh
who have suggested that that may have been the kind of thing that took place there's no absolute
consensus on it in the way that there's generally very little consensus in archaeology but i think
everyone would accept that there is a profound transformation that takes place there and that's
kind of fascinating because you know one of the things that we're told in the traditional narrative
of human history is that once you have very large dense human populations and once hierarchy sets
in in those kind of settings it is irreversible whereas here we seem to have a situation where
there is a reversal yeah like you say in um in in in western political history people say though
isn't a successful slave revolt until haiti for instance which is you know as far as we know is
broadly correct but that may have not been the case in the america you make this great sort of
rhetorical question in the book which is what we talk about the abolition of slavery um and of course
we talk about the story of simonda bolivar and tucilla mature and the abolitionists and whatnot
but perhaps it was abolished numerous times many times in history yeah i mean i think this is just
sort of classic eurocentrism you know the idea that yeah maybe these things were happening elsewhere
but they don't really happen until they happen in a european context i mean it's just a kind of
sorting and filtering mechanism um which allows you to say that europe has some kind of monopoly
on progressive politics which you know even if taken to an extreme length can become a justification
for colonialism genocide and all the rest of it is say well at least we were bringing this kind of
you know these sort of progressive concepts of democracy um which were completely lacking
in all these other places so you know despite the fact that we decimated them ruined their
landscapes and killed most of the people at least you know we sort of again you're back to stage
theory at least we moved them on at least we got them out of that that that that kind of malaise
that they were clearly stuck in will know you know one of the things we show in the book is that
far from it you know there's a huge array of conscious political experimentation going on
outside european contexts and we have evidence for your area of expertise is west asia northeast
africa um although you're very lucid on the americas and elsewhere you had to research it for
this ginormous 700 page book um what i want to talk about is you've got sites like gobekli tepe
in um eastern turkey you've got these incredible megalithic sites in in malta this might sound
strange questions it's not in the book is it possible that if cities precede agriculture
that you have homo sapiens living alongside archaic humans potentially in urban environments
because you know neanderthals are around until relatively recently in europe
is it is it plausible that there were i mean permanent settlements that sort of see them
featured together or is that just something that we can never even speculate on i wouldn't
personally refer to gobekli tepe which is much later i mean there's no neanderthals around at
that point so we're going back about to about 9 000 bc here in in the middle east and i wouldn't
personally characterize gobekli tepe as a city i think we're dealing with a site which is clearly
permanently settled but where you have periods when people are coming together and aggregating
and coordinating their activities in very large numbers okay so i'll rephrase it yeah
it's a built environment which is a permanent built environment yeah plausible that you had
humans operating alongside archaic humans in those in those kinds of places well if we go back
let's say a bit further a lot further like 50 000 years ago um we know at that point there are at
least four probably five different species of humans around the planet there's us there's the
neanderthals there's the denisovans there's home of floriansis in indonesia which are the little
people sometimes playfully called hobbits um and there's also some more recent discoveries from
luzon island in the philippines so this is a situation with no modern parallel when you've
actually got different varieties of the human species interacting we know genetically that there
was interaction of the closest possible kind there was reproduction across those species
some of them um so yeah i mean and actually when you go back even further to the origins of our
species the picture now looks rather like that so we're going back now to africa to the african
continent where you know there used to be this idea of sort of mitochondrial eve and that there
was one ancestral savannah environment where suddenly we became humans actually the modern
fossil evidence and genetic evidence suggests that that's wrong and that actually we evolved
on the african continent but in multiple different environments between about 500 000 200 000 years
ago coastal environments forest environments and savannah environments and there were periods of
isolation and periods of contact between ancestral human populations which could be very long so you
actually get a huge amount of physical variation you see it in the fossil evidence and if you think
about physical variation imagine what was going on with language or child rearing habits or social
customs so again you know it flies in the face of this very entrenched philosophical habit of trying
to reconstruct the original form of human society there wasn't one and just the panoply of experimentation
and social forms which is kind of inconceivable to us but actually that's where we that's where
we come from yeah we're a product of this um this kind of composite uh composite of different
subspecies and different traditions and let's talk about pseudo archaeology if that's the right word
there is such a word pseudo archaeology pseudo archaeology um and i i feel like particularly
with the rise of the internet youtube it's probably increasingly something of an entry point for people
who eventually end up in sort of more formal archaeology is not the right word archaeology
proper i suppose there might that might be the gateway that then sends them to somebody like
yourself maybe yeah it could well be why do you think pseudo archaeology is increasingly popular
why isn't there there's clearly a there's clearly a desire for it in the cultural zeitgeist well
let's be clear what we're talking about because i don't think it's immediately obvious to a lot of
people what the difference would be between what you're calling pseudo archaeology and what people
like me do and teach for a profession um pseudo archaeology i guess or at least my mental picture
of what you're talking about is probably largely written by people who've never actually taken
part in an archaeological field project or you know aren't actually engaged in producing any of
the evidence that you and i have been talking about today but who for other reasons choose to present
a reconstruction of the past which is often presented as rather mysterious or even conspiratorial
as the people like me uh you know the reason we devote our adult lives to learning all these skills
and teaching archaeology is because we want to cover up the truth okay um and that the truth
is actually available to people who don't do that right who may have had entirely different
career paths and you know i don't want to come off snobbish you know there's nothing wrong with
people speculating and reaching their own conclusions but actually what is often presented
as some great new revelation is actually just a very old rehashed obsolete theory that comes out
of what was probably mainstream archaeology you know sometime in the early 19th century like you
know lost city of atlantis that kind of thing there's nothing new about those ideas and you know as
i hope comes across in our book and in our conversation the real evidence is fascinating
and it's puzzling and it's challenging on its own terms you don't need to you know
come up with confections and elaborations to make it interesting just try and get to grips
with it is already challenging and stimulating enough without you know it's trying to surround it with
some fabricated area of mystery it's always the way with conspiracy theories because you you you
talk to somebody and they'll say oh this person is controlling this and it's this secret cabal of
these people and look that there's a great deal of exploitation um in the world and yes the powerful
regular system and in extraordinary ways which actually we can discern and understand you don't
need to you don't need to be talking about the bilderberg group or i god knows what no but you
know it's really important and i i do get a little bit irritated sometimes with colleagues of mine
in the way that they respond to what you've called pseudo archaeology um which is to say um you know
we're the scientists we know best and um if you believe any of that stuff you're just a lunatic
well i think i think that's um you know it's obviously true in a sense but you have to look
also at the history of our own disciplines um which again as we've been talking about are very
strange in the way that they will deny humanity and consciousness to whole populations and whole
groups of people you know when when europeans first saw those monuments at places like kahokia
they couldn't fathom you know the idea that native people would have constructed these things they
came up with all kinds of wacky theories about laferics or you know vikings coming over or or
you know whatever it may be lost tribes of the israelites and those sort of ideas were coming
out of what was then mainstream european scholarship you know in egypt where i've
done a lot of work on the the origins of ancient egyptian civilization the period before all of
that you know the pyramids and mummification all the famous stuff is what archaeologists call the
pre-dynastic i mean it's almost if you don't want people to be interested if you go to a
conference on the pre-dynastic they'll be talking about like you know we measure this kind of pottery
and it's slightly different from that kind of pottery and you know it's all a huge turnoff for
anyone who's trying to figure out what's actually going on and if you go even deeper you know where
i work at ucl where you studied you have the petri petri museum if you ever stuck your head in there
wonderful place which is now very openly engaged in looking at its own history and flinders petri
the archaeologist who it's named after was a eugenicist he believed that non europeans were
intellectually inferior and he was very into this whole business of phrenology and measuring people's
skulls and that sort of thing and he actually had a theory in the late 19th century that ancient
egyptian civilization could not have been created by africans and that there had been an invasion
of what he called the new race okay so we're talking about theories which are at least as wacky
there's the kind of stuff that you'll see on netflix now but they're coming from within our
disciplines and it's easy frankly to you know empirically refute those kinds of theories about
some lost race of people from atlantis or whatever but i think that's only half the battle we also
have to introspect a bit and ask the more difficult questions about how did those spaces open up in
the first place in which that kind of theory is able to gain traction and i do think a lot of that
does have to do basically with racism and the idea that people long ago on different continents
could possibly have been as intelligent and creative as us albeit in different ways you know if you
have a mental block with that i think you have to ask yourself but there are more ambiguous
examples of this aren't there so you know there's there's people out there who say that the sphinx
is significantly older than the pyramids it's still constructed by people in egypt you know not by a
sort of race of aliens and that actually we're really wrong and it's thousands of years older
than we presently think would you call that a conspiracy theory no it's a completely legitimate
line of questioning um it just happens i think not to really lead anywhere terribly interesting i
mean there are ways of investigating that sort of thing and you would also have to put it in the
context of what we do know about what was going on before the pyramids and the construction of the
sphinx in the fourth dynasty which is fascinating in its own right you know i mean i've been to
a place called umel kab which is in the south of egypt which is where you have the earliest royal
cemetery what's sometimes called egypt's first dynasty and it is fascinating and you've actually
got a very disturbing phenomenon there that we talk about in the dawn of everything which is the
burials of the earliest egyptian kings and queens there's these great sort of holes in the ground
with all these elaborate staircases and furnishings completely surrounded by smaller
sort of cubicles where other people were buried and i'm talking about hundreds maybe even thousands
of other people who it is generally thought by archaeologists were ritually killed in order
to be buried around the tombs and it's not just people actually one of the earliest egyptian kings
goes by the name which we can read in early hieroglyphs amusingly his name is aha and it's
transcribed into english as aha and aha's tomb actually has not only human beings in pits
there's also like three lions buried in it nothing to do with the england football team
and you know that isn't that fascinating enough you know let's try and get our heads around what's
going on there which we do in chapter 10 or something of the dawn of everything let's talk
about that that's kind of intriguing you know why does the beginning of what we call the ancient
state involve this extraordinary carefully orchestrated violence against people and
you know the sphinx has no place in that context let's but we can reconstruct something of what
was going on and it's perfectly interesting in its own right but i suppose a pseudo archaeologist
respond to you they'd say well this civilization is older than the first dynasty perhaps they could
say that it's a lost civilization again we know actually quite a lot about what's going on it's
actually one of the things i wrote my phd about is it's the fourth millennium bc so that long
period that's referred to as pre-dynastic because if all they were trying to do was build dynasties
we actually know quite a lot about what was going on in those periods and you can go and see it i mean
go to a museum go to the the british museum go to the ashmolean museum in oxford it's fascinating
stuff you know they had these beautiful artistic styles this is one of the things i wrote about in
my phd actually you know we all get obsessed with the monuments the sphinx the pyramids what you see
if you focus on ordinary people and particularly their burials because we have a lot of evidence for
how people were treated in funerary rituals egypt is incredible in that sense that you can trace the
evolution of a ritual it's a funerary ritual you can trace its evolution over thousands of years
we know how people were buried and what you see is kind of fascinating in the build-up to the time of
the the first dynasties and the first pharaohs and pyramids people lose a lot of the capacity to
conduct their own rituals so you start off with a situation where almost anyone can be buried like
a prince or a princess with sort of gorgeous elaborate ornamentation and very individualized
pottery and beautiful cosmetic articles and with the rise of the kingship and the pharaonic state
people seem to lose a lot of that kind of aesthetic control over their own lives and no longer able
to conduct their own rituals which is kind of fascinating you see something similar with the
rise of the inca empire where we do again have you know spanish colonial accounts and descriptions
of what's going on where in order to perform an important ritual like a marriage or a funeral
or to honor your ancestors you need certain resources you need bread and beer what's called
chicha in order to just perform the ritual and do the right thing but of course not everyone
can get their hands on those resources in the same way that in egyptian funerary rituals at a
certain point you have to have bread and beer but to have bread and beer you know you have to have
access to estates where cereals are farmed and you have plough agriculture so people who can't
actually look after their families in a cultural sense i'm not talking about biological survival
but you know who can't actually complete their their necessary social rituals begin falling into
debt uh relations of debt um or we'll go and we'll have to go to extraordinary lengths and make
sacrifices just to be able to do that and that seems to be a big part of what creates hierarchies
and systems of dependencies is people either abdicating or somehow losing control um over
over their own um yeah their own sort of basic uh basic kind of life rituals or life cycles
what future projects do you have lined up i'm involved with various um sort of side projects
at the moment i don't find the time right now to do uh much research in depth so i'm actually
involved with projects which are not strictly writing projects but just trying to keep myself
you know moving on a bit so i'm involved with a new collaboration with a group that you might
have heard of called forensic architecture based at goldsmith's college that's an interesting one
because they do mostly human rights work um and they use architectural theory and principles
modeling to go to court over a whole range of different issues from uh deforestation in the
amazon they did the mark dougin case and top them uh extrajudicial killings those archaeologists
architects architects architects forensic architects now i have that forensic architecture
eyal weizmann his amazing team um so he came to uh an event a big event in germany in berlin
about the dawn of everything which was called uh the civilizations frage the civilization
questions big three-day event and the the curator of that invited eyal who gave a presentation
that just sort of blew me away and when we got back to london he's based here you know we just
sort of went out for coffee and we had the most incredible conversation of you know his take on
the book it's all very much through the lens of what they do and at first i couldn't really see
the connection because the scales are obviously radical different but he read our book as a kind
of extended case study in forensic architecture in the sense that it's an anti-state narrative
where as in some of the cases i've mentioned you know you can't always prove definitively
the other version of events like the non-police version or the non-official version but you
can just poke enough holes and cast enough doubts on the official narrative so that it
starts to wobble doesn't stand up in court in the court of judgment in our case um and in the
process of making it wobble you open up other possibilities for speculation and i thought
well this is intriguing you know it's right i mean what it's describing is a very similar kind of
logic to our book um so we decided to collaborate on something so we're trying an experiment i can't
say too much about it right now but i'll be able to say more about it early in the new year and it's
going to focus on these incredible archaeological sites in ukraine in ukraine you have cities going
back as early as the earliest ones that we know of in mesopotamia in what's now iraq and parts of
syria so we're going back around six thousand years ago you have these huge cities that present no
evidence of centralization not in political or economic terms and there is a big debate about
whether they should or should not be referred to as cities or rather as something else like
overgrown villages or megasites you know you get lots of sort of euphemistic terms being used and
essentially what it makes you do is reflect on what we mean by a city um and what are the assumptions
that are baked into that so we're going to produce a kind of installation which models these rival
accounts and debates doesn't necessarily try to prove one version but which visually kind
of immerses you in the questions if that makes sense so that's one project i'm doing uh i've
also been talking i mean one of the things that's really um just been kind of overwhelming about
the the response to the dawn of everything is the creative response and i'm not talking particularly
about um people writing or you know academic writing or even essays but musicians uh artists
filmmakers i was just the other week with a uh a fantastic singer and artist she's based in Paris
Yasmine Dubois her stage name is La Fonda and um she wrote a song called the dawn of everything
and she came here to London and performed it uh you know a few weeks back at the uh the festival
hall they had the women life freedom event for human rights in Iran and she performed it there
and i was very upset actually i was just getting back from Chicago and couldn't quite get through
my jet lag to actually physically make it but we met up afterwards and um you know that kind of thing
is um it's incredible you know to me and i think it's a huge tribute to David you know to my late
co-author uh i think he had that incredible capacity to take some of these rather obscure
topics and concepts and write about them in a way that touched people and made it personal
and made them want to engage and and create and in a way i see it all as a kind of extended
tribute to him which i've just been a lucky sort of passenger final question just on David if that's
possible um David Graeber was your co-author on this book he tweeted in 2020 i believe how
he'd finished the manuscript that's right yeah he put out a sort of faux jim Morrison quote yeah
my brain is bruised with no surprise we finished something like that yeah and then he passed away
a month later yeah about three weeks three weeks after we finished the manuscript so what's it been
like to publish a globally best-selling book i mean it's been it's been translated into multiple
languages you've worked on it for a decade alongside somebody yeah and then they're not there to share
in the success yeah um well you know you have to kind of i have to sort of pinch myself in two
senses there's there's the kind of good pinching yourself that the the reception is so extraordinary
and you know suggested to me recently by someone who's apparently got some figures that we're you
know getting up to a million copies worldwide which is just can't really get your head around it
but then there's also the other kind of pinching yourself which is very painful which is you know
just constantly having to accept that david's not around to witness any of it um and he was
really looking forward to it i mean this book he couldn't wait to get out there and have these kinds
of conversations should have been the two of us really sitting here having fun with with you shooting
the breeze about all this stuff so it's very painful and very paradoxical and the only thing
that i can really hold on to in the middle of it all is that he would definitely want me to be out
there working hard talking about the book telling people about the book and just trying to get the
work across uh as well as i'm capable of so you're doing it partly for him as well when you go that
extra mile yeah yeah 100 yeah david wengrow thanks for joining us my pleasure thank you